---
layout: post
title: "Kicking against the goads"
categories:
  - article
tags:
  - society
  - FOSS
---

A goad is a traditional farming tool: a long stick with a pointed end for
managing behaviour in animals, and encouraging them to move in a particular
direction, by means of painful prodding. This could be used of a range of
animals, from cattle to elephants. Most animals, wanting to avoid pain, will
move. A stubborn animal might refuse to move, for as long as it can endure the
pain. It might even kick the goad, causing even more pain.

In general, humans tend to take the path of least resistance. Avoid unnecessary
difficulty, and allow ourselves to get herded in a certain direction. Life is
too busy and too stressful, so many of us lie back and go with the flow,
because fighting against it is just too much effort.

The Monopolies and Mega-Corps of this world know it. They know that it's easier
for an ISP to make money off its existing customers by raising prices, rather
than increasing revenue by gaining new customers. They know that most people
will just accept the new price with a grumble, and life goes on. They could
even leak large quantities of customer data in a hack, and still keep their
customer base.

Insurance companies know they can raise your premium by 20% or 30% at renewal
time, and still retain some customers. It doesn't seem in their interest any
more to keep customers for life. Price hikes and bait-and-switch offers are
instead the order of the day.

Digital Rights Management is a painful goad that prods us to take the easy
route, and just buy a Kindle, and buy e-books from Amazon forevermore. Buying
DRM-free books, or stripping DRM-laden books purchased elsewhere to enable
freedom to read on any of our devices - it's been made deliberately complex,
and very few make the effort. It hurts when you kick the goad that's prodding
you. Isn't it awful that our lives have been deliberately made stressful, just
so that we conform to the path set by these big companies, and be under the
false illusion that these companies are making our lives easier?

Smart meter
